Most people would find the picture of our universe as an infinite tower of tortoises rather ridiculous, but why do
we think we know better? What do we know about the universe, and how do we know it? Where did the
universe come from, and where is it going? Did the universe have a beginning, and if so, what happened before
then? What is the nature of time? Will it ever come to an end? Can we go back in time? Recent breakthroughs
in physics, made possible in part by fantastic new technologies, suggest answers to some of these
longstanding questions. Someday these answers may seem as obvious to us as the earth orbiting the sun – or
perhaps as ridiculous as a tower of tortoises. Only time (whatever that may be) will tell.
As long ago as 340 BC the Greek philosopher Aristotle, in his book On the Heavens, was able to put forward
two good arguments for believing that the earth was a round sphere rather than a Hat plate. First, he realized
that eclipses of the moon were caused by the earth coming between the sun and the moon. It was this same force that caused objects to fall to the ground. The earth’s
shadow on the moon was always round, which would be true only if the earth was spherical. If the earth had
been a flat disk, the shadow would have been elongated and elliptical, unless the eclipse always occurred at a
time when the sun was directly under the center of the disk. Second, the Greeks knew from their travels that
the North Star appeared lower in the sky when viewed in the south than it did in more northerly regions. (Since
the North Star lies over the North Pole, it appears to be directly above an observer at the North Pole, but to
someone looking from the equator, it appears to lie just at the horizon. From the difference in the apparent
position of the North Star in Egypt and Greece, Aristotle even quoted an estimate that the distance around the
earth was 400,000 stadia. It is not known exactly what length a stadium was, but it may have been about 200
yards, which would make Aristotle’s estimate about twice the currently accepted figure. The Greeks even had a
third argument that the earth must be round, for why else does one first see the sails of a ship coming over the
horizon, and only later see the hull?